# Hello
## hello hello

At the beginning of 2021, I was very digitally unhealthy. I started to use my phone more than ever. My average screen time skyrocketed to 11+ hours per day. What’s the worst part? I wasn’t doing anything meaningful on my phone. When the day was over, the void of knowing that I’ve wasted so many hours made me feel bad. The negativity got carried over to the next day. After a few weeks, I was in such a bad shape: unproductive, anxious, easily distracted, and lacking sleep. 

Studies show that the internet and digital device have penetrated the life of most adults. About one-quarter of adults in the US reported that they are almost always online.  The invention of the smartphone makes digital entertainment accessible from anywhere and at any time. When it makes a lot of things much more convenient, it can affect people in negative ways like what I have experienced. 

I want to break down what was driving my behavior, explore the scientific reasons behind it, and reflect on how I improved my relationship with my phone.

The temptation to instant joy
My mental state plays a huge part in the onset of this obsession with my smartphone and the internet. I was enduring the greatest anxiety and uncertainty about life that I’ve ever experienced so far. Stressed out with school, graduate school applications, and internship hunting, I would go on my phone whenever I had some free time instead of proper relaxation. Why my phone? Because it is the quickest way to find something entertaining so that I can escape from the stressful reality. 
Supplying instant entertainment is what exactly social media platforms and their smartphone applications are designed to do . They employ a sophisticated reinforcement method using variable rewards . You get rewards occasionally so you would keep going, hoping for the next reward to come. This was what kept me on my phone as I was always looking for that next funny video or beautiful post, assuming it would appear soon. For other people, it might be the next like or comment. When a reward is perceived, it increases the dopamine activity, which is a type of neurotransmitter responsible for the pleasure feeling, forming a positive feedback loop in our brain. Long-term enhancement of this feedback loop eventually leads to the cue (such as turning on the phone screen), instead of the reward itself, becoming the trigger for dopamine activation. Moreover, dopamine drops rapidly after an increase. Once you get pulled back from the satisfaction you just experienced, you will want to get more. The mechanism social media platforms use fits perfectly into this dopamine-driven feedback loop.
The habit of keeping my phone close by
I always have my phone, connected to the internet, near me. As I started to pay close attention to my interaction with it, I noticed that I would reach for my phone, turn on the screen, check it, and then put it back again and again. I wasn’t aware of how often I was doing that until then. Sometimes I would even unlock the phone, thanks to the smoothness of the fingerprint unlock, and start doing completely unnecessary things, like opening the settings menu and checking my inbox. It is a motor reflex that I’ve developed.
It might not seem like a serious problem. Isn’t it just an a-few-minute break? Not really. It’s silently draining your cognitive energy.
Task switching incurs cognitive costs.  The switching is most expensive when going from an easier task to a complex one immediately . Responses will be significantly slower after such a switch. Normally, looking at our phone is a much easier task than the actual real task we want to finish while being interrupted frequently.
The notification system makes things worse. When a notification draws your attention, it’s eating your limited daily cognitive resource up. Whether you click on it and get distracted for a few minutes or just simply look at it for a few seconds, the intake and process of information are done. Study shows that email and other notifications increase inattention and stress.    This is also why browsing on your phone is not proper relaxation of your brain. As much as you are not deliberately contemplating, using your phone is inevitably cognitive demanding because of the massive amount of information present online.
The fear of being socially disconnected and left out is another reason for people staying on their or social media , sometimes for a lengthy period. This one did not apply to me as much as the previous two.
Getting my life together (and what kind of design would help)
Phone detoxication was a long and gradual journey for me. 
The social media platforms and the smartphone system put so much effort into pulling you in but so little into helping you stay away when you want to. 
My first attempt was setting a screen time limit for all applications on my phone. It worked for a few days, then I got used to clicking the “15 more minutes” option. It really should just quit, or even lock the app for me. If I need more minutes, I must gain it through something more demanding than just one click.
I proceeded with uninstalling all my social media applications and hiding “Safari”. This method worked better than the last one. I sometimes reinstalled them back, but the effort involved served as a reminder so that I was more conscious of how I should use them. I would delete them as soon as I sensed that I was spending too much time on them. My screen time goes down to 6-8 hours per day.
Recently I improved a bit further. My average screen time is stable at 5.5 hours per day while I can name a lot of fragments that are meaningful such as group meetings, catching up with family and friends, and trip planning.
All the reasons and methods aside, “I” am the greatest factor and the best method. My mental state got better as my life was settling down. As the new semester starts, I finally have my feet on the ground. I found my goals and passion again. I also developed a time management system that suits me. There are so many other things I want to do other than staying on my phone, so I do those instead.
My awareness of the concept of “digital wellbeing” also helps. I watched “The Social Dilemma”. It helped me understand what external factors contributed to my phone “addiction”. Being conscious of those is key to a successful detoxication.
